
The Evolution of Façade Laws in The City of New York

New York City Administrative Code, §28-302.1
Title 28, Chapter 3, Article 302
Maintenance of Exterior Walls
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCadmin/0-0-0-157991

Created as §C26-105.3 by Local Law 10 of 1980
Amended to §C27-129 by Local Law 11 of 1998
Repealed and replaced by  §28-302.1 by Local Laws 33 and 38 of 2007
Amended by Local Law 126 of 2021

Rules of the City of New York 1 RCNY §103-04
Title 1, Chapter 100, Subchapter C, §103-04
Periodic Inspection of Exterior Walls and Appurtenances of Buildings.
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCrules/0-0-0-2825

CREATED AS §32-03 JANUARY 13, 1999
MARCH 27, 2009 [AMENDED]
JANUARY 28, 2011 [AMENDED TO §103-04]
MAY 17, 2013 [AMENDED]
FEBRUARY 20, 2020 [AMENDED]
NOVEMBER 12, 2021 [AMENDED]

Rules of the City of New York 1 RCNY §101-07 
Inspections and approved agencies
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCrules/0-0-0-2347 
Selected provisions pertaining to facades

CREATED JULY 1, 2008
FEBRUARY 20, 2020 [AMENDED]


And selected relevant memoranda from the Department of Buildings



 
LOCAL LAWS 
OF 
THE CITY OF NEW YORK

FOR THE YEAR 1980

No. 10

Introduced by Council Member Manton (by request of the Mayor); also Council Members Crispino, Eisland, Foster, Friedlander, 'Messinger, Michels, Trichter and Olmedo
A LOCAL LAW

To amend the administrative code of the city of New York, in relation to requiring periodic inspection of exterior walls and exterior appurtenances of buildings and requiring a record of such inspection to be kept on the premises.

Be it enacted by the Council as follows:

Section 1. Sub-article 105.0 of article one of part two of title C of chapter twenty-six of the administrative code of the city of New York is hereby amended by adding thereto a new section C26-105.3, to read as follows:

Exterior walls and appurtenances thereof.-In order to maintain a building's exterior walls and appurtenances thereof in a safe condition, the following additional requirements shall apply to all existing buildings or buildings hereafter erected which are greater than six stories in height:

§28-302.1	Inspection requirements. --A critical examination of an applicable building's exterior walls and appurtenances thereof shall be conducted at periodic intervals as set forth by rule or regulation of the commissioner, but such examination shall be conducted at least once every five years.
(1)	The initial examination for any existing building shall be conducted within two years of the effective date of this local law and the initial examination for any building hereafter constructed shall be conducted in the fifth year following the erection or installation of any exterior wall and/or enclosures.
(2)	Such examination shall be conducted and witnessed by or under the direct supervision of a licensed architect or licensed professional engineer by or on behalf of the owner of the building.
(3)	Such examination shall include, in addition to an inspection, a complete review of the most recently prepared report.
(4)	Such examination shall also be conducted in accordance with applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
§28-302.2	Report of examination- Such architect or engineer shall submit a written report certifying the results of such examination to the commissioner, clearly documenting the condition of the exterior walls and appurtenances thereto. The report shall include a record of all significant deterioration, unsafe conditions and movement observed as well as a statement concerning the watertightness of the exterior surfaces. Such report must be signed by and bear the professional seal of such architect or engineer.
§28-302.3	Necessary repairs.-Upon the filing of the architect's or engineer's report of unsafe condition with the commissioner, the owner, his agent or the person in charge shall immediately commence such repairs, reinforcements or precautionary measures as may be required to make the building's front walls or appurtenances thereof conform to the provisions of this code. Such ameliorative work shall be completed within a time period to be established by rule or regulation of the commissioner.
§28-302.4	Exceptions.-The additional requirements imposed by this section shall not be applied to:
(1)	Exterior walls set back more than twenty-five feet from the street and/or any paved pedestrian walkway.
(2)	Buildings having an on-going maintenance program subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Buildings for the exterior walls and appurtenances thereof, under the supervision of a licensed architect or licensed professional engineer retained by or on behalf of the owner.
§28-302.5	Violations.-Any person who shall violate, or refuse, or neglect to comply with any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both; and any such person shall, also, for each offense, be subject to the payment of a penalty in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars for each month there is non-compliance, to be recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the commissioner.


§2. This local law shall take effect immediately.


THE CITY OF NEW YORK, OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK, S.S.:

I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of a local law of The City of New York, passed by the Council on February 5, 1980, and approved by the Mayor on February 21, 1980. DAVID N. DINKINS, City Clerk, Clerk of the Council.

CFRTIFICATION PURSUANT TO MUNICIPAL Home RULE LAW SECTION 27
Pursuant to the provisions of Municipal Home Rule Law Section 27, 1 hereby certify that the enclosed local law (Local Law No. 10 of 1960, Council Int. No. 748-A), contains the correct text and received the following vote at the meeting of the New York City Council on February 5, 1980: 41 for; none against,
Was approved by the Mayor on February 21,1980. 
Was returned to the City Clerk on February 21, 1980.

ALLEN G. SCHWARTZ, Corporation Counsel.
(i)	 
(A)	 




(B)	
1.	
A.	
i.	 
(ii)	
- 
§32-01 The Design and Installation of Curtain Wall and Panel Wall (Non-Loadbearing Exterior Wall) Systems 

(a)	Definition

(i)	Curtain wall or panel wall system. For the purpose of these rules, a curtain wall or panel wall system shall be defined as an exterior building wall, in skeleton frame construction which carries no roof or floor loads. Panel walls are attached at each story and may be wholly supported at every story or other stories. Curtain and panel walls consist of materials, veneering or assemblies other than loadbearing walls of stone, brick, hollow tile, concrete block, or tile, or combination of them, bonded together with mortar and laid up in place, or of concrete poured in place. Curtain and panel walls may include glass, metal, [sic] stone or masonry elements arranged in such a manner so as not to intentionally exert common action under load. Such elements move independently of each other and the supporting structure.

(b)	Applicability

(i)	These rules and regulations shall not apply where such wall systems or any portion thereof does not extend more than forty feet above legal grade.

(c)	Factors to Be Considered

The Licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Architect of record shall be responsible for the design of the wall system. The Licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Architect may designate such responsibility to other licensed professionals. The Licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Architect of record or designee shall provide information to, and cooperate with, the designer for the wall system so that singly or jointly the following factors shall be considered:

(1)	Movements of the Skeleton Frame Structure

Care shall be exercised in the design in order to prevent the transmission of loads from the building structure into any part of the wall system through the connections or adjacent building elements or components. In this regard, the following items shall be amongst those considered:

(i)	Sidesway in buildings over 100 feet in height.
(ii)	Elastic deformation of members supporting curtain or panel walls such as live load deflections of spandrel beams, differential live load deflections, etc. Short-term and long-term deflection are particularly significant in concrete frames.
(iii)	Creep and shrinkage of concrete frames.
(iv)	Thermal movements.
(2)	Dimensional Changes of the Building Structure and of the Curtain Wall Supports.
(3)	Differential [Sic] Movement Involving the Building Structure and Veneer
(4)	Construction and Related Trade Requirements Such As:
(i)	Window supports.
(ii)	Window washer tracks.
(iii)	Back-up walls and insulation.
(iv)	Construction tolerances.
(5)	Protection Against Water Damage
In this regard, the following items shall be considered:
(i)	The protection of veneering joints. Care should be taken in the selection of sealants.
(ii)	The location of expansion joints.
(iii)	The possibility of a secondary system for controlling water which may enter veneering joints because of design or installation failure, sealant failure, or condensation.
(iv)	The prevention of trapping water in wall components.
(v)	The use of lap strips in joints/splices of extrusions.
(6)	Prevention of Failures
In this regard, the following items shall be considered:
(i)	Specifying performance criteria for veneering.
(ii)	Testing for water leakage of specimen wall sections.
(7)	Completeness of Architectural Drawings
(i)	They shall contain adequate details of the wall assemblies.
(ii)	Termination details of roof and store front.
(8)	Fabrication, Installation and Maintenance Requirements
(i)	Sufficiency of the horizontal and vertical expansion joints for thermal and other building movements.
(ii)	Fabrication and erection tolerances of the connections.
(iii)	That the flashing, weep-holes and air circulation have been designed for water defense to prevent uncontrolled water infiltration.
(iv)	The prevention of electro-chemical reaction (galvanic action) from use of dissimilar metals.
(v)	The anchoring and supporting system is suitable to the building materials.
(vi)	The connection design is feasible.
(vii)	The testing program is feasible and adequate.
(viii)	The selection of the stone.
(ix)	The anchor locations, including proper anchor-holes, kerfs, or slots.
(x)	The transportation and handling requirements. Panelized units shall be handled and transported if possible in the position in which they are going to be anchored on the building. If other positions have to be used during transit, the panels and the stone anchors should be designed for such positions also.
(d)	The general contractor, to whom the work permit is issued, shall be responsible for the fabrication and installation of the wall system.

The general contractor may retain, designate or sub-contract such responsibility to Licensed Professional Engineers, Registered Architects, construction superintendents, contractors, sub-contractors, and manufacturers.

(1)	They shall receive information from, and cooperate with the licensed professionals and designer for the wall system, so that singly or jointly the factors enumerated in §32-01(c) shall be considered in the fabrication and installation.
(2)	They shall ascertain that the fabrication and installation of the wall system is done in a safe, workmanlike and generally acceptable manner in accordance with:
(i)	The Administrative (Building) Code and the Department of Buildings' Rules and Regulations and Directives and Memorandums.
(ii)	The Department of Buildings' Approved Applications and Plans.
(iii)	The Contractors' Specifications and developed Plans.
(iv)	The Accepted Erection and Shop Drawings.
(v)	The Manufacturer's recommendations.
(e)	The general contractor, to whom the work permit is issued, or his retainee, designatee, sub-contractor or manufacturer responsible for the wall system shall submit the shop drawings and the computations employed to the Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Architect of record for their acceptance.
(f)	The Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Architect of record shall review the shop drawings and any computations of the wall system for compliance with plans approved by the Department of Buildings, and with the applicable provisions of the Building Code, its reference standards, and the Rules on Exterior Veneering Materials, adopted by the Board of Standards and Appeals, and he shall certify his approval or acceptance of such shop drawings and computations to the Department of Buildings.
(g)	A copy of the shop drawings referred to above, marked approved or accepted by the Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Architect of record shall be available in the field for use in the installation of the wall system until the application is signed-off as completed by the Department of Buildings.
(h)	The general contractor, to whom the work permit is issued or his retainee, designatee, sub-contractor, or manufacturer responsible for the fabrication and installation of the wall system, shall certify to the Department of Buildings that the materials and shop fabrications to be supplied by him are in conformance with the approved or accepted shop drawings and with applicable national standards and §27-132(a) of the Building Code of the City of New York.
(i)	The requirements of §§32-01(a) through (f) above shall be complied with before the installation of the wall system is begun.
(j)	The installation of the wall system shall be subject to controlled inspection as specified in §27-132(a) of the Building Code. It shall be the responsibility of the person performing the controlled inspection to see that the wall system or its component parts is incorporated into the work in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the approved or accepted shop drawings.
(k)	The controlled inspection field check shall include but not limited to the following:
(1)	The supporting structure is:
(i)	Properly aligned and within the designed tolerances.
(ii)	Without missing or mislocated inserts.
(2)	The framing components are:
(i)	Properly sized and aligned.
(ii)	Without missing or mislocated anchoring provisions.
(iii)	Without structural defects. (In stone, weak seam, hairline cracks, etc.)
(3)	The vision and spandrel lites are not defective.
(4)	Anchors are properly placed, welded, bolted or primed.
(5)	Accepted anchoring or materials are used in lieu of others where there are field changes.
(6)	Weeps and tubes are in place.
(7)	The joinery is properly sealed.
(8)	Accepted sealants with sufficient elongation capability are provided.
(9)	The gaskets meet specifications.
(10)	The end dams are sealed where called for.
(11)	Horizontal and vertical movement joints have been provided.
(12)	"Erection shims", "wedges", mortar draps [Probably intended "drafts"] or other material in movement or expansion joints have been removed.
(13)	Observation of unanticipated movements.
(l)	The samples submitted to, and marked approved or accepted by the Professional Engineer or Registered Architect of record, consisting of, but not limited to sealants, glass and fasteners shall be available in the field until the application is signed-off as completed by the Department of Buildings.
(m)	The alteration of an existing wall system for other than ordinary repairs, whether made voluntarily or as a result of damage, deterioration, or other cause, in its entirety or for a portion thereof, shall be made to comply with the pertinent provisions of Article 12 of Subchapter 10 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 and Reference Standard RS 9-5 and all other requirements of the new Building Code, effective December 6, 1968 as amended and/or the Rules on Exterior Veneering Materials, adopted by the Board of Standards and Appeals, regardless of the percentage which the cost of making the alteration bears to the value of the building.
(n)	The Registered Architect or Professional Engineer responsible for controlled inspection shall report unsafe wall system conditions to the Department of Buildings.
(o)	The Registered Architect or Professional Engineer responsible for controlled inspection shall submit to the Department of Buildings signed copies of required inspection and test reports (of the work in progress) and comment as to the conformance of material and work to Code requirements.

 
§32-02 Conditions of a Building's Exterior Walls and Appurtenances That Constitute Conditions Dangerous to Human Life and Safety 

(a)	Pertinent Conditions 
The following violations are determined to constitute conditions dangerous to human life and safety and are subject to the provisions of Paragraph 3 of Subdivision d of §26-248 of the Administrative Code. Any condition relating to the exterior walls of a building and appurtenances thereof that is designated: 
(1)	by an architect or engineer as being in an unsafe condition in the report filed by an architect or engineer with the Department of Buildings pursuant to §27-129 of the Building Code, or
(2)	by personnel of the department as being an unsafe condition upon reviewing the aforementioned [sic] report or after having made an inspection of the building

(b)	Civil Penalties Pursuant to §26-248(d)(3) of the Administrative Code, in the event any person fails to remove any of the violations listed in this rule, after having been served with a notice personally or by certified mail indicating that such conditions exist and requiring removal or compliance, unless the removal of such condition is prevented by a labor dispute or is the result of vandalism beyond the control of the owner, such person shall, in addition to any other prescribed penalty, be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $150 per day commencing on the date of the service of such notice and terminating on the date that such removal or compliance has been substantially completed. When service of such notice is made by mail to the owner, liability for civil penalties shall commence five days from the date of such mailing.

(c)	Discontinuance of Action Upon Removal of Violation Pursuant to §26-248(f) of the Administrative Code where a notice requiring removal of a violation listed in this rule has been issued, liability shall cease, and the Corporation Counsel, on request of the Commissioner of Buildings, shall discontinue prosecution of the civil penalty action only if the removal or compliance so required has been completed or substantially completed within ten days after the service of such notice. The Commissioner shall, upon good cause shown, grant additional time for such removal or compliance. In addition, the civil penalties shall be tolled from the date the owner certifies under oath, on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, that the removal of the violation has been substantially completed. If a subsequent inspection by the department shows a failure to have removed the violation, the civil penalties shall be deemed to have accrued as of the first day a notice of violation has been served.

(d)	Explanation
This rule declares that a condition relating to the exterior walls of a building and appurtenances thereof that is designated to be an unsafe condition by an architect or engineer in a report filed pursuant to Administrative Code §27-129 or by personnel of the Department of Buildings, is a condition dangerous to human life and safety. The failure to remove such a violation after notice subjects the violator to the penalties set forth in the [sic] Administrative Code §26-248(d)(3), including a civil penalty of $150 per day from the date that such removal has been substantially completed.


 
§32-04 Masonry Parapet Walls

(a)	Definition 
Parapet. The term "parapet" shall mean the continuation of an exterior wall, fire wall, or party wall above the roof line. §27-232 Administrative Code.

(b)	Basic Requirements 

Parapet walls of masonry constructed hereafter shall comply with the following requirements: 

(1)	They shall meet the requirements of Reference Standard §[sic]10-1, §10.4c of the Administrative Code. 
(2)	Structural members supporting parapet walls shall be designed to resist torsional stresses in addition to stresses due to bending, where loads are placed eccentrically.

(c)	Existing and New Parapet Walls 

Owners of those buildings which are provided with masonry parapet walls, except where such walls are located on buildings used exclusively for J-3 occupancy, shall have the parapet walls inspected annually by a competent person, such as a bricklayer, building superintendent, builder, architect, or engineer. Any wall found to be in an unsafe condition shall be removed promptly. Any parapet wall found to be out of plumb by a horizontal distance exceeding one-eighth of its height, shall be removed.

(d)	Replacement

Parapet walls that are removed shall be replaced when the parapet wall is required by the provisions of §27-333 of the Administrative Code

 


 
JULY 1, 2008
101-07 Inspections and approved agencies

(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, all terms used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the building code. In addition, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(8) Qualified exterior wall inspector. A New York State licensed civil or structural engineer with 1 year relevant experience or a New York State registered architect with 1 year relevant experience. 

(9) Relevant experience. Direct participation and practice related to the underlying construction activities that are the subject of the special or other inspection where such participation has led to the accumulation of knowledge and skill required for the proper execution of the special or other inspection. 

(c)
(7) Exterior wall inspections.
(i)	Examination of a building’s exterior walls and appurtenances thereof pursuant to section 28-302.2 of the Administrative Code shall be performed by or under the direct supervision of a qualified exterior wall inspector.
(ii)	A qualified exterior wall inspector shall maintain records of inspections and tests for at least 6 years and shall make such records available to the department upon request.
(iii)	A qualified exterior wall inspector shall maintain insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph (7) of subdivision (b) above.
(iv)	Except as modified by the building code and this section, the provisions of 1 RCNY 103-04 shall apply.
 

 
	
A.			
1.			
2.			
3.			
4.			
5.			
6.			
7.			
8.			
9.			
10.			
11.			
12.			
		
	


 

